Dear young people, dear believers,
today's Gospel in the first sentence
tells us, Jesus truly, truly, those who
keep my words will have eternal life.
If you recall when we pray the Creed,
we also profess our faith in eternal
life and the resurrection of the body.
However, sometimes I get the impression
that many find it hard to accept.
Once, after Easter, I led a Mass just
like this one and in the sermon, I
asked the people, we celebrate Easter.
I asked, who among you believes that
Jesus is truly alive, that He has risen?
A few people raised their hands.
How many of you here tonight
believe in eternal life?
First you.
Great.
I can change the topic then.
I'm glad to see many of you believe
in eternal life, but let's see how
many of you believe you'll be saved.
No hands.
Just kidding.
Just kidding, back to the topic.
So, we profess and
believe in eternal life.
First of all, what should we emphasize?
That we inherit eternal life.
Does our birth and existence in this
world have any meaning at all if
we don't think about eternal life?
It would perhaps be too ordinary,
too monotonous, too meaningless to be
born just to die and that's the end.
We are actually born to live this
life, to die, but also to pass
through death into eternal life.
And it is very important for us as
believers how we live our lives now.
Whoever does not carry life within
themselves now will never see heaven.
Many people, like the Jews in
today's Gospel, are so entrenched
in earthly matters that they don't
think about eternal life at all.
They neither have the time to think
about it nor do they engage with it.
But you see, if we don't carry that
heaven within us now, we won't later.
I always like to say that eternal
life doesn't start after you die,
with God waiting up there in some
rooms to decide who goes to heaven,
who to hell, and who to purgatory.
Eternal life begins here on earth.
That's why it's very important
for us to understand that
we are not here by accident.
We weren't just randomly born, living,
struggling, and praying to God to
take our last breath and find rest.
So, it wouldn't make sense, but if we
internalize that we were born here, we
live, and for us Christians, death is not
a taboo topic, for us Christians, death is
not a word we use to scare each other, yet
we increasingly live the mentality of this
world where we don't talk about death.
When I conduct spiritual retreats,
I like to ask people, and I'll ask
you here as well, how often do you
see children at funerals nowadays?
Who still takes children
to funerals nowadays?
Many parents will say, no, no,
no, it's not psychologically good
for them, they might get scared.
And then we hide it from the children,
raising the youth as if people don't die.
I remember as a child, it was completely
normal that when someone in the village
died, we all went to the funeral, you see
the coffin, you see the deceased person.
And now, now when I'm at
funerals, you rarely see children.
Because we hide from
children that people die.
And then we wonder where our
fear of death comes from?
We present this world as if
there is no death, no illness.
Yet Jesus himself came to die, to open
heaven for us and give us eternal life.
Even Jesus died and was in
the grave for three days.
And sometimes we want to hide all of that.
It's very important how we
live in the present moment.
How we perceive death and our transition.
Because the way we live our life,
that's how our death will be.
Some people die in fear of death,
while others die peacefully.
Those who die peacefully,
calmly, serenely, they already
had a relationship with God.
They lived this moment wisely.
And now I come to what I want
to say: How to earn that heaven?
How to earn that eternal life?
And that communion with Jesus in heaven.
Well, the servant of God, I believe
many of you have read his works,
Fulton Sheen, gives us excellent
advice on how to get to heaven.
And he says this: if you want to get
to heaven, then take someone with you.
If you want to get to heaven,
then take someone with you.
And what does that mean?
In the Holy Scripture, it says, you
will recognize them by their fruits.
Our desire should be
to love what God loves.
And what does God love?
God loves for every person to be saved.
And that's why it's our duty, and that's
why this servant of God says, if you want
to earn heaven, take someone with you.
On the other hand, we should care
and feel for people who are unaware
of the moment they are living in,
that minutes are passing by and
every day we are closer to the grave.
We shouldn't be afraid of time passing,
of aging, or of death approaching.
But we should be afraid if we
don't help others reach heaven, if
we don't guide others to eternal
life because we remain silent.
Isn't it funny that today many
families spend more time and care
arranging a restaurant for the wake
than they do for the spiritual state
of the deceased, how they will die
spiritually, in what condition they die.
We are more preoccupied with organizing
the funeral, even though we know we
have a person in the house who is dying.
Who hasn't received confession,
hasn't received Jesus, hasn't
received the anointing of the sick.
And what do you say to us then?
We didn't call you so the
person wouldn't get scared.
As if we priests bring
death, and even if we did.
How can you be afraid of
the Anointing of the Sick?
What kind of excuses are these and what
kind of love is that for a dying person?
Where is this sentence from Fulton
Sheen, "lead someone to heaven"?
If we let our sick die without
the sacrament, equipped, and then
swear by love and organize wakes
and pay for the best catering,
that won't help the deceased.
Tell me, who benefits from
love that comes too late?
Love that comes too late helps no one.
When I die, and everything
that is done afterward, that's
love that comes too late.
So if we have love for our loved
ones, if we want to send someone
to heaven, then we should show
them love while they are alive.
Gradually prepare the person.
We should start by frequently
thinking about death ourselves.
Because one saint beautifully said that
a Christian is not true if they don't at
least once remember that they have to die.
Why?
If you think about death, you prepare
yourself and then you are not afraid.
If you neglect this topic, if you hide
it from children, if you hide it from
the sick, of course, it becomes a shock,
because no one here will live forever.
And what is common to all of us,
both the poor and the rich, the
famous and the unknown, is death.
But do you know what sets us apart?
What sets us apart is that we will
all die, but faith distinguishes us.
Some will die, but some will have
faith and will be resurrected.
That is the difference among
all people, regardless of
nationality, race, or status.
We all die, my dear, but not
everyone will be resurrected.
Those who have prepared themselves
will be resurrected, those who have
made ready, and not avoided this topic.
That's why I brought it up.
That's why Jesus says tonight, truly,
truly I say to you, whoever keeps
my word will have eternal life.
Even the Jews can't believe what He
is talking about, that He knows God.
If we haven't met God the Father here
on earth, we won't meet Him when we die.
So, the problem isn't with our enemies;
the problem is if we are our own enemies.
If I'm not honest with myself
and my time is passing, can
any of us bring back yesterday?
We can't, but it will await you
when you stand before God and how
you lived that day, each one of us.
Saint Paul says, "My desire is
to depart and be with Christ."
See how the saints think.
"My desire is to depart and be with
Christ." Do we have the desire to die?
Because do we understand that our dying
is a passage to eternal life, not the end?
The one who believes that when they
exhale their last breath and die,
that it is the end of everything,
is obviously not a Christian.
A Christian has hope.
And that is what Jesus said, I am
going to prepare a place for you.
So we deserve heaven through Jesus.
I am going to prepare a place for you.
In my Father's house,
there are many rooms.
See how wonderful that is.
And then when you see all the
saints, like Saint Paul, who said, I
desire to depart and be with Christ.
We humans live here to
die, to be with Christ.
Do you understand?
We live here, we struggle so
that we can die, to ultimately
be eternally with Christ.
So why the fear around death?
How much do we fear this topic, how
much do we fear this experience, and we
don't want to open up or talk about it?
And then we always have our excuses.
We are young, it's not the time to
talk about it, I'll do it later.
The sun, when it prepares for death?
It seems to me that in Croatia, it's most
often when you end up on machines and when
you can't speak, bound by all the tubes.
Then it's too late.
Even if you're young, because every
minute echoes later in heaven.
How do you live them?
So now, every day is constant.
Let's not leave it until we grow
old, until we get sick, and here, I
say, most often we start preparing
to meet God and transition, that is,
to pass into eternity, when we are
completely sick and can't do anything
anymore, and then we remember.
Saint Ignatius of Antioch writes to
the Christian community and says, "How
beautiful it is to set like the sun in
this world, so that we may rise in the
heavenly dawn with God. How beautiful
it is to set in this world to awaken in
the presence of God." And what is that?
Dying to oneself.
Every day when you take care,
prepare, and as I mentioned
earlier, that is our setting.
But you will dawn in the presence of God.
And see how beautifully the saints put it.
There was a professor at the university
who wrote a farewell letter to her
colleagues, and it goes like this: I
will cherish the moment when you read
this letter of mine in church, because
before you go on summer vacation,
I want you to know the truth about
me, which I learned last Friday.
The doctor finally told me my
true diagnosis, cancer that
can no longer be operated on.
If he had been a Christian, he surely
wouldn't have been so shaken, nor would
he have delayed so much in telling me
the truth, because he would know, as
you and I know, that we face both death
and life equally if we live in God's
presence and according to His will.
If God has decided that I will soon be
with Him, I am joyful because of it.
Please, do not grieve
for me for even a moment.
I do not bid you a cold farewell with
this goodbye, but rather send you a
warm greeting until we meet again in the
blessed land where I may be allowed to
lift the veil when you are departing.
With a heart full of
greetings for each one of you.
I bid you farewell, your
friend and colleague.
Two weeks after that
letter, she passed away.
So, this is an example of a
person who lives their faith, who
is not afraid of death because
they know where they are going.
They are transitioning to eternal life.
You also have the experience
of Pope John XXIII.
He viewed the transition
of death so optimistically.
And when he fell ill, the doctors
didn't want to tell him the full
diagnosis to encourage him, but when
they told him a milder version of
his illness, not the truth, he told
them they didn't need to hide it,
saying, "My affairs are in order."
And then his secretary came to him
again, and he said, I am completely
at peace, should I be afraid
to hear the Lord's words, today
you will be with me in paradise.
And how many such people do we know, our
grandmothers, relatives, who had faith
and who died and who wanted to die.
Today, we do everything to avoid dying.
I have often said in my sermons
when I go to bless houses,
that is everyone's intention.
Child, pray for my health.
Just so I can live longer.
That is nice and necessary, but I say
that God is still waiting for us up there.
And that we need to have faith no
matter how and how long we live.
If you listened to this letter, I really
like that it highlighted and said, I
greet you with goodbye, not with God.
Goodbye, until the next meeting.
We bid farewell to our deceased
until the next meeting.
Now I ask you, we profess, as I mentioned
earlier, in the belief of eternal
life and the resurrection of the body.
How wonderful it would be if we
Christians, who believe in eternal
life after death and the resurrection,
and in eternal life, bear witness,
bear witness wherever we are.
How nice it would be if on our tombstones,
when we erect monuments for our deceased,
it said "here awaits the resurrection"
instead of "forever with God." We cannot
write "forever with God" on tombstones.
It should only say "this one
awaits" or "this one awaits the
resurrection." That is a testimony.
When we buried our deceased and loved
ones, we believe in "until we meet again"
and not "forever with God" and those
dramatic phrases we sometimes write.
That is why it is important,
when you listen to the Mass, we
have these Eucharistic prayers,
the first, second, and third.
In the third Eucharistic prayer, it says,
"And our deceased brothers and sisters,
all who have passed from this world
in your love, graciously receive them
into your kingdom, where we also hope
to enjoy your glory with them forever."
Where we also hope to enjoy
eternal glory together with them.
And what is important, dear young people?
Maybe some of you study philosophy
and know philosophy and such things
better than I do, but surely you
have all heard the story about the
philosopher Diogenes, the Greek
philosopher who decided to sell wisdom.
And of course, he set up a stand
where he sold wisdom, and everyone...
They laughed and mocked him, but
eventually, a man with his servants
came by and was curious about what
this wisdom he was selling looked like.
So, he gave his servant three coins
to go and buy wisdom from him.
The servant went, and the philosopher told
him to repeat three times to his master:
in everything you do, think of your end.
In everything you do,
think about your end.
In everything you think,
Amen.